hi I'm Steve Clemens and I have a
question does the assassination of a top
Hamas leader outside Gaza mark an
escalation of Israel's war in the Middle
East let's get to the bottom
line the assassination of Salah aruri
hamas's Deputy political leader and one
of its top military leaders along with
six other members of the group in Beirut
brings new focus on the regional
implications of the war that started on
October 7th when Hamas Fighters broke
through the fence surrounding Gaza and
killed hundreds of Israeli soldiers and
civilians Israel's response has been a
Non-Stop bombing campaign and a military
incursion that has killed more than
22,000 Palestinians at this point mostly
women and children Israel has also
blocked supplies of food water
electricity gas and medicine and
displaced almost all of the 2.3 million
Palestinians in Gaza creating a
humanitarian catastrophe so where is the
region heading after 3 months of this
allout War and what changes with the
assassination of Salah aruri today we're
talking with retired US Army Brigadier
General Mark kimet who served in the
state department the defense department
us Central Command and NATO General
kimet thank you so much for joining us
let me just start out you're a military
guy and obviously October 7th was a
horrible and brutal moment uh between
Israel and and a faction uh of
Palestinians in Hamas I'm just
interested in terms of pursuing
objectives as you were think about this
as a military planner and plan how is
this war going from your perspective
well um remember that the military plan
is derived from the Strategic objectives
set out by the by the government and in
this case the government the Netanyahu
government set out three primary
objectives number one to destroy hamas's
leadership number two to to completely
eliminate the infrastructure the
terrorist infrastructure inside of and
number three to get the hostages back um
we all knew this was going to be a long
war and it's proven out to be obviously
we've only got onethird of the hostages
back there have been a number of Hamas
leadership killed but certainly not
enough to decapitate Hamas and while the
terrorist infrastructure is being
discovered it's still fully operational
so I would say that at this point even
the Israelis would admit militarily
they're only about onethird of the way
through achieving the military
objectives set out by the Strategic
guidance so from a military and and
strategic perspective are Israel's goals
achievable at this point well first of
all U I've said before and I don't want
to be sarcastic but I'm not sure that if
I was Israel I would be listening to the
United States based on our win loss
record over the last 20 years we have
got to recognize that Israel is trying
to fight a war no differently than we
fought World War II and we fought Japan
which in both cases we said we will
fight until the destruction of the
military in Japan and the defeat of
Hitler's government and his military in
Germany they are using the same tactics
we used the firebombing of
treson obviously the use of the atomic
war but we took no prisoners
rhetorically in that war and we fought
on of a strategic objective the way that
the Israelis see it which is defeat the
organization destroy the infrastructure
and start new now whether if that's the
right strategic uh goal or not that's
how the Israeli military is fighting it
I've heard you in the interviews you've
done make that comparison to
particularly Japan before but also you
know Germany and others uh that were
were annihilated in many ways um by the
United States after World War II and
afterwards actually became important
strategic allies and and friends but in
this case what I'm wondering is does it
make a difference that Israel is the
occupying force of the Palestinian
territories that that the temperature
the water the the climate in fact there
are uh Wikileaks documents that show
that Israel was only willing to allow
Gaza in previous years to to exist on
economic barely above sustenance level
and so when you kind of look at that and
the long Legacy of occupation in the
region of Palestinians doesn't that
matter in this case and isn't that
fundamentally different than the US
Japan uh analogy yeah I I agree it is
and it certainly may be harsher in terms
of the occupations that we did in
Germany and Japan but we were ruthless
in Germany about weeding down to root
and core uh any remnants of Nazi Germany
and it took five six years before we
even allowed Germany to have its own
Army uh again I'm not justifying it I'm
just trying to explain it uh and I think
that explains to some extent why U
Israel is taking such a hard line on all
this but there's also another
distinction right now Gaza is surrounded
by
likeminded Arab states uh we did not
have that problem in World War II and
this is where the analogy fails Germany
was surrounded by like-minded
uh States like-minded like us same thing
with Japan but this issue with Hamas
this issue with Palestine clearly
resonates throughout the region and that
in many ways is where in my mind the
Israelis will fail they will fail
because they may win inside of Gaza they
W may win a strategic Victory inside of
Gaza but it's that larger victory that
they need throughout the region where
they're going to fail because of the
tactics techniques and procedures
they've been using inside of Gaza Mark
you spent a lot of time in the Arab
world you know many we we have many
common friends in the Arab world and I
and I think there's a real tension out
there uh over what they're seeing um
Israel do right now in response to the
October 7th attacks how do they not make
revenge against what they're seeing part
of their DNA well you can't look at the
war in Gaza today since October 7th in
isolation there have been Revenge
operations the INF fatatas the two INF
fatatas the 1947 War um and on and on
and on there has been an attempt to um
extract revenge or recover the lands
from The River To The Sea since the
formation of the state of Israel that
hasn't worked it hasn't worked for
either side and that's why I
think revenge can't be the answer there
has to be a new modus Fendi that goes
beyond Oslo that goes beyond all the
other attempts there has to be radical
change in the politics in Gaza in the
West Bank to resolve the Palestinian
issue uh which hasn't succeeded so far I
think it's important to look at what was
lost on October 7th were we on the verge
do you believe of a very different
Middle East that would have not only
have normalized it between Israel and
Saudi Arabia but might have led to the
full creation of of a pal inian state
with Israel actually acquiescing to that
no I I completely agree uh it's
unfortunate that the politics in the
United States don't permit you these
days to talk about the first step which
was the Abraham Accords Abram Accords
demonstrated that countries in the
region could come to an accommodation
with Israel and of course the
culmination of that which couldn't be
achieved during the Trump Administration
for a number of reasons was to get Saudi
Arabia to join that Abraham Accord uh
they were very close it was coming along
even Jake Sullivan in his foreign
affairs article uh that was published
after the attack into Gaza unfortunately
for him thought they were on the
Breakthrough thought that the
Palestinian cause was under control
thought they were making progress and
thought he was spending less time on the
issue I mean just for our audience Jake
Sullivan's the national adviser to
President Biden but let me ask you
something deeper when You' mentioned
Jake Sullivan and the president Lloyd
Austin Anthony blinkin the Secretary of
State are all right now I I think at the
beginning of this conflict it was to
give Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu a
big hug say we're with you emotionally
we understand and whisper in his ear and
say don't do what we did after 911 don't
let
rage Define your actions and ever since
then almost every comment you see
is about trying to get Israel to listen
to the US you've just said they should
be ignored but does this have an impact
on the perception globally of our
efficacy and of of American power and
and when you look at I mean Lloyd Austin
has been one of the most dramatic
commentators you know frankly out there
saying they're heading towards strategic
defeat if they don't change course you
saw two Israeli cabinet members come out
and and talk about relocating G Gins out
of the ter even though that comment
which equates to ethnic cleansing is one
where the B Administration says in no
circumstances would that ever be
tolerated and done but still it goes on
I so the question is one of the
perception of American strength in in a
conflict with its Ally not that that
gets before you get to enemies yeah two
things I'd say first of all I did not
say that Israel should ignore it I was
just trying to say why Israel probably
will ignore it right uh second it's
often unfortunate that you get a couple
of comments out of the knesset that uh
reflect that Hardline approach I would I
mean these are cabinet members these are
C and cabinet members um but but both
they and the knesset pretty much speak
for a certain sector of the society look
we can get crazy talk out of Marjorie
Taylor green we can get crazy talk out
of uh AOC but that doesn't mean it
reflects the entire policy the state of
Israel or the the Congress of the United
States uh that said it is Amplified
through the media that that's somehow
reflects policy but one thing I will
note uh if anybody in Israel in the
political uh sphere is upset about this
they haven't resigned yet so there may
be I think there is at worst grudging
acceptance within the political class
inside of Israel that this is the way to
do it is there a shadow war going going
on right now between Iran Israel and the
us when you look at um a a terrorist act
uh seemingly two bombs that have gone
off killed over 100 people in Iran at uh
Sol mani's grave in
Memorial um there's that you also have
the hooes that are firing on and and uh
uh intervening with uh Red Sea shipping
you have other minor skirmishes here and
there and from a on a scale of 1 to 10
how were would are you today that this
crisis which has been fairly isolated
Israel and Gaza could grow dramatically
out well first of all I don't think that
uh this is any sort of Shadow war that
we haven't been seeing for the last well
candidly since 1979 right pre October
7th irgc K's force was operating in Iraq
operating in Syria training in Lebanon
training the houthis so this war has
been going on this proxy war being gu Ed
and directed by the ks force uh what
we're seeing now is just a measure of
scale if it was at a two before October
7th it's now at a
five the people that you should really
ask is the government inside of tan do
they want to expand this war or are they
a little concerned that their proxies
out there are operating on their own uh
this would not have been a question if
solomani was still alive
sulamani was probably the greatest proxy
leader in the 20th century he kept them
under control if they were trying to
expand this war that I could say was at
the behest of the of the government in
Iran but it may be that his replacement
is so weak that these proxies are
operating on their own but it is clear
that Israel has about seven different
fights going on from these proxies and
um I'm not necessarily too concerned
about the current level of fighting I
mean it's tragic that they're attacking
the ships it's tragic that there are
bomb the Rockets being fired from
Hezbollah into Israel uh it is tragic
that there are missiles being fired
inside of Iraq but I don't think that
we've hit the US Red Line uh to either
react against the houthis in an
offensive way or a dramatic increase in
the offensive operations against the
hushed in side of Iraq so I think at
this
point it is it
is being contained but if there are
Americans killed if there is an American
warship sunk I would say at that point
Steve all bets are off about a regional
War the US has committed to withdrawing
an aircraft carrier that had had
deployed to the region the Israelis are
reportedly pulling thousands of its uh
troops from Gaza do you look at that as
an inflection point of any kind well
first of all the the Ford is being
pulled back because it was on extended
deployment anyway and it was time to
bring them home um that to me shows a
measure of uh
U Less concern on the part of the us
than there was on say October 10th that
could of escalation of escalation to me
the primary purpose of the Ford was to
keep hisbah contained and knew let them
know that if you started responding
heavily we would respond kind the
reduction of the Israeli presence inside
of Gaza is not only a reflection of the
fact that the fight is moving down to a
lower Pace but also you can't keep
50,000
reservists uh inside of Gaza for too
long they've got civilian jobs there
will be an impact on the economy uh they
didn't sign up for a long War so that
some people say that they're just
getting ready for the big one I don't
think so I think it's more that
reservists just want to go home so on
new New Year's Eve a pretty significant
number of rockets were launched by Hamas
into Israel um and you just made a
comment which I don't often hear in the
media that Israel has made less progress
against tamas than many may think they
have made I I think that's a fair
assessment if I were to watch at least
the US media that infrastructure uh
exists command and control exists and
they launched Rockets which is an
indication of hamas's ability to
continue to function under pretty toxic
circumstances so what is your assessment
now of hamas's capability and why given
the strength and power of Israel has it
failed thus far to do more well let's
talk about the infrastructure there's
300 miles of infrastructure how long
would it take us to destroy the New York
Subway system so U that will take some
time I think they have made a tremendous
Headway inside of Gaza City against the
fighters they don't have the leaders yet
leaders are going to be the last ones to
die um and they're going to plan it that
way
so I think that there is an expectation
around the world that this can be short
brutish and ugly fight but with the
Strategic objectiv set up by the
government of Israel Netanyahu in
particular this can't be a short fight
it's just physically impossible to have
a fight this short Israel a year ago was
in deep conflict internal conflict over
its own way of of uh uh managing its
democracy managing its Supreme Court uh
uh controlling or not uh the direction
of the court that action has been vetoed
has been overturned by Israel Supreme
Court I think it's an important part of
the story to look at what you think when
it comes to um the solvency of of of
Israel's own identity in this and what
it's trying to hold up whether you think
this court action is is important in
this equation or not not wanting to
present a divided uh Israel in the eyes
of the
world the example I would use was
December 7th
1941 prior to that there was great great
uh fighting going on in the United
States political fighting between the
isolationists that didn't want to get us
into a war in Europe U others that felt
we should at least provide Aid and
assistance to the Brits as we did with
lend Le and to the Russians right but as
soon as December 7th hit the country
came together the same thing happened
after December 11th uh I I think you're
seeing that in Israel right now that
they had the luxury of having these
types of democratic arguments uh prior
to October 7th but on October 7th they
saw an existential attack on their
country and naturally um that will bring
people together whether it's right or
whether it's wrong Wars have a tendency
to do that it has a tendency for people
not only to come together as a country
but willing to sacrifice their own
rights for security when you look at
what the US says and what the is what
what Netanyahu today will accept or not
accept by way of looking at the
management and governance of Gaza in the
future when you look at other
stakeholders that's before you even get
to the Palestinians
themselves you can't Square it no body
is on the same page with regards to what
happens the day after uh in Gaza who
government governs it who rebuilds it
Etc and I guess my question is Israel
under Ariel Chiron withdrew from Gaza
but they controlled everything that went
in or out basically and so my question
is what would you recommend as someone
who's so familiar with states that were
invaded governments changed what is the
solution that you think from Mark Kim's
perspective might work when you look at
governance in Israel down the way down I
mean in Gaza down the way yeah
unfortunately my recommendation is
totally um unfeasible infeasible it
would be a Arab U military force inside
providing security the Arab League would
provide some measure of governance it
could require the UN for some period of
time for humanitarian assistance all of
this under the Chapo of the United
Nations
accepted by the Arab countries accepted
by Israel that to me seems to be the
optimum way for post-war governance of
Gaza and of course billions coming from
the International Community a marshal
plan for Gaza why is that unfeasible um
the politics and the view of the region
will not accept that Israel will not
accept the PLO it's unlikely that an
Arab force would come in and protect
Arabs against Arabs I don't think we've
ever seen that before um I'm not sure
the UN would want to buy into it the
only thing I can be sure of is that the
International Community is willing and
ready to spend billions of dollars for
the Reconstruction and any notion that
uh any organization whether it's the
government of Israel or or any other
organization is against the
resettlement uh of the IDP
inside of Gaza has got another thing
coming so you believe in resettlement
possibilities no I said just the
opposite I said there is no doubt that
there will be overwhelming support to
get the people back into their houses in
Gaza City hanun and in other War torn
areas and that the International
Community will subsidize that to rebuild
the infrastructure that's been destroyed
um we've had uh references to to Israeli
cabinet members who talk very openly
saying the Humane thing to do is to
relocate those people um like I've read
the UN text and to me it reads as as a
war crime is am I wrong I don't think
you're wrong at all I think any notion
that they're going to
turn Gaza into Carthage and salt the
Earth that's sounds good on TV but it's
impractical immoral and illegal
let me ask you finally um Ian Bremer was
on our show uh from the Eurasia group
and he said uh something we with regards
to Palestinians that that you know you
can't keep us in a box and pretend that
we don't exist you have to release these
people from their Siege and occupation
this is something Ian said is a
fundamental part of any stability
equation in the future do you see any
possibility of that I do I I don't think
that Israel will be permitted if they
want to be a respected member of the
International Community to allow the
rhetoric of Gaza being an open air
prison to continue and I don't think the
International Community will support
that in the least um but I think it's
also important to talk about occupation
because people seem to get it wrong when
you talk about occupation do you mean
the Israeli occupation of Gaza of the
West Bank or do you mean the occupation
from the river to the Sea
there are many my my colleagues overseas
still believe that the UN establishment
of the state of Israel is illegal
occupation and they will not stop the
axis of resistance until the Israelis
are swept out of that country well
important and sobering discussion
General Mark kimt former US assistant
Secretary of State thank you so much for
being with us thanks for having me Steve
so what's the bottom line Israel is is a
superpower in the Middle East region but
the way it's imitating how the United
States lashed out after the attacks of
911 will lead to the same dilemma that
America faced all powerful but powerless
Israel has failed to use its power to
shape Better Lives for the Palestinian
people over the decades and their
boiling frustration is always right
under the surface so now after so Much
Death and destruction what does Victory
even look like what is solved the
destruction of Germany and Japan which
we discussed don't apply in the case of
Gaza and the West Bank when Israel
controls what goes in and what comes out
and every facet of daily life in the
occupied Palestinian territories what's
clear is that so far no one not the
political leaders in the region not in
Europe and not in the US have figured
out how to stop the cycle of a Palestine
that is either forgotten belittled Left
Behind or put under siege and that's the
bottom
line
[Music]